# Data Preprocessing in Python - Beginner's Guide

Hello World!

In this article (my first!), I will walk you through a simple, yet generic workflow for data preprocessing and exploration using everyone's favourite data science programming language <i><b>python</b></i> in Jupyter notebook IDE on a biological dataset. But first, let's us talk about the what and why of data preprocessing. <i>The adage 'Garbage in, garbage out'</i> is what makes data preprocessing the first and most crucial quality control (and painstaking) step in building models and performing data analysis.

<b> Data Preprocessing </b> is the preparation and transformation of raw data into a meaningful format. In most cases you will be working with data that you personally did not generate, therefore you cannot guarantee the quality since most data were in some way generated by humans - humans will make mistakes. Therefore, data preprocessing is necessary because raw data is often noisy, with missing values, outliers or experimental artefacts, which distorts the kind of conclusions we can make from the data. <i> Always, always preprocess your data! </i>

There are 4 main components in the data preprocessing workflow:

- <b> Data Clean-up</b>: dealing with missing values , outliers or poorly formatted entries.
- <b>Data Integration</b>: combining data from multiple files or other sources in a meaningful way.
- <b> Data Transformation</b>: scaling, normalizing, aggregating and smoothing the data.
- <b>Data Reduction</b>: reducing the complexity or dimensionality of the data without compromising (too much) the integrity or intrinsic structure of the original data.

I will explain each aspect as I walk you through a data preprocessing workflow using flow cytometry dataset consisting of measurements of fluorescent labelled antibodies on blood cell sample. My code is written in Python 3 in Jupyter notebook. Jupyter offers an interactive user-friendly environment and is widely used data analysis tool for reproducible research among scientists. You will find the full detailed tutorial on my github by <a href="https://github.com/rhondene/data_science_ML_lessons_biology">clicking here</a>.
